---
layout: post
title: "2017 in review"
date: 2017-12-25 12:00:00
colors: pinkred
---

2017 is almost over now. This year I'll try something new and write a
blog post recapping what I've been up to this year and what my hopes
are for next year. Happy new years everyone 🎉

## Code

I started out working as a **fullstack** developer at Famly which had me
writing **Javascript** for our frontend and mainly **PHP** and **Scala** for our
backends. However, given our current team structure, working fullstack
had me quite quickly feeling like a jack of all trade, master of none.
Though I was able to help out on both sides I felt like I spent too
much time context switching and weren't able to contribute on the
level I'd like on either side. I decided to stop working fullstack and
instead focus on the **backend** - so far I'm happy with that decision. I
still lurk around in the Copenhagen frontend community and write a bit
of frontend code on side projects which seems to be enough to keep me
satisfied for now.

Most of the new stuff we're working on is written in Scala and exposed
through **GraphQL**. So far we're very happy with GraphQL both on the
frontend as well as the backend.

Getting back into Scala has been interesting. Quite a lot has happened
in the four years I've been absent from the community and I'm still
catching up - I have a whole stack of papers on my desk about various
forms of effect systems that I'm hoping to get through early next
year.

All in all I've been writing quite a lot of PHP, a good amount of
Scala, a bit of python for various small tools, and more Bash than I'd
recommend anyone write.

Besides the usual work of implementing features and fixing bugs I've
spent a lot of time improving our CI/CD setup and experimented with
[automating our development environment](http://blog.mads-hartmann.com/2017/01/15/automating-developer-environments.html). Turns out I enjoy working on
infrastructure and tooling way more than features 🤔

## Writing

I've written 7 blog-posts including this one. That's my record so far
but it's still way less than I'd like - I have 10 drafts lying around
that never fully materialized into full blog posts and I have ideas for a
dozen more.

I've been working with [Packt](https://www.packtpub.com/) on a three days course on Scala called
**Professional Scala**. I'm co-authoring it with two other authors and
we're given a day each to complete. I'm writing the material for the
third day which is mostly about topics related to functional
programming. It's been quite interesting. I really enjoy writing and
this is the first time I've been paid to do so. I must admit that
writing towards a deadline is something quite different from the kinds
of writing I usually do and it does take some of the joy out of it. It
Might also be the fact that all the writing happened at night or in
the weekends where I'm not usually in the mood to do any actual work
😉

## Talks

This year I was fortunate enough to be able to give [a talk](https://speakerdex.co/mads-hartmann/automating-developer-environments-ee3c577a) at [Web2Day](https://web2day.co/)
in Nantes, France. This was the second time I've given a talk at a
proper conference (or well, third if you count a small presentation I
did about my Google Summer of Code project at Scala Lift Off in London
back in 2010). Somehow I'm equally surprised each time by the amount
of work it takes for me to write and prepare a presentation. And how
much energy I spend thinking and worrying about it. But the feeling
you get once the presentation is delivered is worth it and this year I
felt way more comfortable on stage.

I also gave two short talks at meetups and sat at a panel on CI/CD.

## Next Year

2018 looks to be a super interesting year for Famly. For business
reasons we have to run a 2nd parallel server setup in Germany using
[Azure Germany](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-au/overview/clouds/germany/). I'm super excited about this as it forces us to put
more effort into our infrastructure and focus on automating and
streamlining a bunch of processes. This is the kind of work that I
enjoy the most so having a solid business reason to do the work is
quite lucky 😉

Additionally we've been able to hire two new great engineers for the
backend team which gives us the capacity to carry out some of the
ideas we've previously only been able to talk about. One of these
ideas is to implement a nice effect system in our GraphQL backend that
will improve our code greatly and simplify things like permission
checking and telemetry. I'm super excited about this and my colleague
[Christian](https://twitter.com/chr_harrington) just finished an initial prototype at our last Famly Hackday
which looks super promising.

I hope to write one blog post each month next year. I certainly have
enough material, I just need to find the time 😉 My [brother](https://twitter.com/mikkel_hartmann) and I have
also been flirting with the idea of writing a book about Machine
Learning called **Snackable Machine Learning** which I think would be
super fun. But first I'll have to finish the Packt course which should
be done some time in February.

Happy new years everyone 🎉
